docs: production vs non-production use (#610)
siderolabs/docs: public/omni/self-hosted/production-vs-non-production.mdx

---

> title: "Production vs. Non-Production Use Under the Business Source License"

Reviewer: Style guide says sentence case, yes?

description: "Interpretive guidance from Sidero Labs on applying the Business Source License's production and non-production distinction to common Omni deployment patterns."
---

> Omni's self-hosted server is distributed under the Business Source License 1.1 (BSL / BUSL). The license lets anyone read, modify, and build on Omni freely, and run it for non-production use at no charge. Production use requires a commercial license: either a self-hosted Omni subscription, or our hosted SaaS, which is licensed for production by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Omni is distributed under the Business Source License 1.1 (BSL / BUSL). The license lets anyone read, modify, and build on Omni freely, and run it for non-production use at no charge. Production use requires a commercial license: either a self-hosted Omni subscription, or Sidero Labs' hosted SaaS offering, which is licensed for production by default.
```

> The line between those two cases comes from one sentence in the license, the Additional Use Grant:

Reviewer: It's actually two sentences.

Reviewer: Suggested (for this whole block) to fix the two-sentence thing and also to make it a direct quote of the license (which is currently misquoted):

-------------------------

The line between those two cases comes directly from the license's Additional Use Grant:

*"You may make non-production use of the Licensed Work, including testing and evaluation of the Licensed Work itself, or personal use in a home lab environment. Use of the Licensed Work to host, run, test, or support any environment on which Customer's own development, operations, or business depends is not non-production use and requires a commercial license, regardless of how that environment is designated."*

<Note>
  That grant is the entirety of what the license says about production vs. non-production use. Everything below it in this guide is Sidero Labs' interpretation of how the grant applies to real deployments, not additional license text.
</Note>

The grant makes two things free — evaluating Omni itself, and personal home-lab use — and treats everything else as production, expressly including any environment your own development, operations, or business depends on, regardless of how it's labeled. The judgment calls that remain are about applying that line to real deployments, particularly standing staging, QA, and internal test environments. The rest of this guide works through them in practical terms.

> *"You may make non-production use of the Licensed Work, including for testing and evaluation, or for personal use in a home lab environment. Any use of the Licensed Work in a production environment requires a commercial license from Sidero Labs."*

<Note>

>   That sentence is the entirety of what the license says about production vs. non-production use. Everything below it in this guide is Sidero Labs' interpretation of how that one sentence applies to real deployments, not additional license text.

Reviewer: It's two sentences.  Suggestion: change to "That grant is the entirety..."

</Note>

> That single sentence leaves room for judgment calls, particularly around staging, QA, and internal test environments. The rest of this guide works through those judgment calls in practical terms.

Reviewer: The license's second sentence is precisely what resolves the staging/QA question ("regardless of how that environment is designated"). With the correct text in place, this should be reframed the way Steve did in the issue. The grant makes two things free (evaluating Omni itself, and home-lab use) and treats everything else as production, expressly including any environment your business depends on regardless of label. The guide then applies that to concrete cases. The judgment calls are in mapping real deployments, not in the license being vague.

## How to tell if you need a commercial license

Most cases come down to a single underlying question:

> Does your organization depend on this Omni deployment, day to day, to develop, test, run, or deliver its own software or business?

> If the answer is yes, you're in production, and a commercial license is required, regardless of what the environment is called (production, staging, QA, dev) or how many nodes it has. If the answer is no, you're in non-production, and free to run Omni without a license.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the answer is yes, you're using a production instance, and a commercial license is required, regardless of what the environment is called (production, staging, QA, dev) or how many nodes it has. If the answer is no, you're using a non-production instance, and free to run Omni without a license.
```

| Internal apps or services your organization relies on to operate | Production | Operational dependency |
| Customer-facing or revenue-generating applications | Production | Real users depend on it |
| Disaster recovery, or hot/warm standby for any of the above | Production | Exists to carry production workloads |
| Managing client clusters as a service provider | Production | Commercial service delivery |
| Commercial training business, students connect to Omni-managed labs they paid for | Production | Omni is the substrate of a paid service customers depend on |

Even at this scale, the underlying rule stays the same: there is no node count or usage level small enough to stay free once a deployment qualifies as production, and there is no free production tier regardless of size. If you would rather not run the server yourself, hosted Omni is licensed for production use by default.

If you are not sure where your deployment falls, contact us with details about what you are running and we can help classify it. Reach us at sales@siderolabs.com, or see hosted Omni pricing at [siderolabs.com/pricing](https://www.siderolabs.com/pricing).

---

> *This document reflects Sidero Labs' good-faith interpretation of "production use" under the Business Source License 1.1 for Omni, and may be updated over time. It does not modify the license or any agreement between you and Sidero Labs. The Additional Use Grant quoted above is the authoritative license text; everything else in this guide is interpretation.*

Reviewer: Nit: add a trailing newline at end of file — GitHub flags "No newline at end of file."
